---
weight: 3
title: The Tones
---

# The Tones

Toaq has, to a lot of its learner's horror, tones. Tones refer to the intonation with which you pronounce a word. While this feature is not present in English words, it does matter a lot in languages like Mandarin, Tsalagi, and of course, Toaq. In these languages, the way your voice's pitch changes as you pronounce a word can change its meaning, kind of like how you intonate questions different from non-questions when speaking English.

You don't need to know how to pronounce tones right away as you start learning, but it's useful to know how they're written, as this is necessary in order to distinguish words - {{% toaq %}}túa{{% /toaq %}} and {{% toaq %}}tûa{{% /toaq %}} are different words. In Toaq, tones don't affect single syllables like in Mandarin; instead, they affect entire words.

Toaq is unique among most languages in that the way a tone affects a word is entirely predictable given that you know that word in some other tone. This is true for most toaq words, and the ones for which it isn't, are very few.

| Letter | Tone Name | Function |
| ------ | --------- | -------- |
| a | Falling | Verb |
| á | Rising | Noun<br>Determiner |
| â | Hiatus Tone | Prepositions<br>Adverbials<br>Object Incorporation |
| ä | Glottal Tone | Clause Openers |

The falling tone starts from high up in the pitch range and drastically reaches down. 

The rising tone starts from low in the pitch range and it rises up.

The hiatus tone is similar to a rising-falling tone, except that the highest pitch must be reached at the first vowel of the word, then that vowel is pronounced a bit longer (hence the "hiatus" part of the name), and then the rest of the word is pronounced in a falling tone.

The glottal tone is similar to a falling tone, except that it doesn't start as high up in the pitch range, and it has a glottal stop separating the first vowel and the rest of the word. If the first syllable only has one vowel, then the vowel is pronounced both before and after the glottal stop.

If their functions aren't obvious to you, that's okay! They're simply meant for you to have an idea of what they'll do - we'll go in depth about this in future lessons.

In some situations, the first three tones might get a glottal stop in the middle as well. Specifically, any tone may have the glottal tone rule of separating the first vowel from the rest by using a glottal stop, under very specific conditions. This is written with a dot under the first vowel of the syllable that is affected by this, or with a dash after the syllable.

{{<button relref="/docs/course">}}← The Letters{{</button>}}
{{<button relref="/docs/course">}}→ First Sentences{{</button>}}